=== MAIN CHARACTERS (by frequency) ===

Pierre: 1784 mentions
Prince: 1574 mentions
Natásha: 1092 mentions
Andrew: 1039 mentions
French: 872 mentions
Rostóv: 715 mentions
Moscow: 705 mentions
Nicholas: 626 mentions
Mary: 610 mentions
Princess: 586 mentions
You: 540 mentions
Emperor: 516 mentions
Napoleon: 467 mentions
Russian: 452 mentions
Kutúzov: 445 mentions
Sónya: 411 mentions
Yes: 410 mentions
Well: 405 mentions
Denísov: 363 mentions
Anna: 293 mentions
Borís: 290 mentions
Dólokhov: 284 mentions
Count: 282 mentions
All: 278 mentions
How: 272 mentions
Why: 266 mentions
God: 262 mentions
Pétya: 245 mentions
Petersburg: 241 mentions
Rostóvs: 216 mentions
Vasíli: 214 mentions
Anatole: 208 mentions
Its: 206 mentions
One: 195 mentions
Then: 190 mentions
Ill: 188 mentions
Now: 175 mentions
Pierres: 167 mentions
Russia: 162 mentions
Bolkónski: 158 mentions
Thats: 149 mentions
Russians: 144 mentions
Mademoiselle: 141 mentions
Only: 137 mentions
Hélène: 137 mentions
Emperors: 136 mentions
Bagratión: 134 mentions
Alpátych: 134 mentions
Mikháylovna: 119 mentions
Countess: 118 mentions
Natáshas: 115 mentions
Alexander: 115 mentions
Márya: 114 mentions
Dont: 114 mentions
Having: 114 mentions
Pávlovna: 112 mentions
Bourienne: 112 mentions
Borodinó: 105 mentions
Your: 104 mentions
Rostopchín: 103 mentions
Not: 102 mentions
Smolénsk: 101 mentions
Napoleons: 100 mentions
Mamma: 100 mentions
Andrews: 96 mentions
Balashëv: 95 mentions
Frenchman: 95 mentions
Just: 93 mentions
Come: 93 mentions
Though: 92 mentions
Berg: 91 mentions
German: 91 mentions
Dmítrievna: 90 mentions
Guards: 88 mentions
Let: 88 mentions
Cossacks: 85 mentions
Kutúzovs: 80 mentions
Bonaparte: 79 mentions
Tíkhon: 79 mentions
Cossack: 79 mentions
Uncle: 79 mentions
Who: 78 mentions
General: 75 mentions
Some: 72 mentions
Hills: 71 mentions
Here: 70 mentions
Austrian: 69 mentions
Bennigsen: 68 mentions
Nesvítski: 66 mentions
Majesty: 63 mentions
Véra: 63 mentions
Bald: 62 mentions
Julie: 59 mentions
Two: 58 mentions
Speránski: 58 mentions
Túshin: 58 mentions
Besides: 57 mentions
Karatáev: 55 mentions
Kurágin: 55 mentions
Bilíbin: 55 mentions

=== RELATIONSHIP SENTENCES ===

“Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of the
Prince Vasíli wished to obtain this post for his son, but others were
“Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?” she
is very unhappy with her father. She is a relation of yours, Princess
Prince Vasíli’s daughter, the beautiful Hélène, came to take her
young man was an illegitimate son of Count Bezúkhov, a well-known
Princess Hélène, Prince Vasíli’s daughter, and the little Princess
His daughter, Princess Hélène, passed between the chairs, lightly
father to be a connection of Prince Vasíli’s. The elderly lady who
had been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince
“How about my son Borís, Prince?” said she, hurrying after him into
Genoa and Lucca laying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, and
Pierre’s remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to
indifferently to his wife’s chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also
contemplated between Anatole and the little princess’ sister-in-law.
husband. Prince Andrew’s eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he
carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Prince Hippolyte, under
Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre’s childish words.
ill-suited to the family circle of which Pierre was almost a member.
“With my father and sister, remember,” said Prince Andrew gently.
Andrew slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.
“My wife,” continued Prince Andrew, “is an excellent woman, one
marry!” concluded Prince Andrew.
dissipated life of his son Anatole, the son whom they were planning to
reform by marrying him to Prince Andrew’s sister.
to their chatter. Anatole kept on refilling Pierre’s glass while
“Dear Countess, what an age... She has been laid up, poor child ...
Catherine’s day, Count Bezúkhov, and about his illegitimate son
“Prince Vasíli’s son, he, and a certain Dólokhov have, it is said,
back to Moscow. Anatole Kurágin’s father managed somehow to get his
“His children are all illegitimate. I think Pierre also is
lost count of his children, but this Pierre was his favorite.”
I was saying, Prince Vasíli is the next heir through his wife, but the
Mikháylovna’s son; Nicholas, the undergraduate, the count’s eldest
were Nicholas and Sónya, the niece. Sónya was a slender little
always be my daughters’ first confidante, and that if Nicholas, with
elder daughter, Countess Véra, with a smile.
a tête-à-tête talk with the friend of her childhood, Princess Anna
“My dear Borís,” said Princess Anna Mikháylovna to her son as
attentive to him. Count Cyril Vladímirovich is your godfather after
Seeing Anna Mikháylovna and her son, Prince Vasíli dismissed the
“Believe me, Prince, a mother’s heart will never forget what you
the count, my uncle; but you, my dear, had better go to Pierre meanwhile
“How do you do, cousin?” said Pierre. “You don’t recognize
Olga went out. Pierre stood looking at the sisters; then he bowed and
moment imagined himself to be Napoleon in person and to have just
slightly sarcastic smile. “I am Borís, son of Princess Anna
After Anna Mikháylovna had driven off with her son to visit Count Cyril
Countess Rostóva, with her daughters and a large number of guests, was
German accent, “for the reasson zat ze Emperor knows zat. He
there are no difficulties in your way.... But Nicholas is my cousin...
Then Nicholas sang a song he had just learned:
Pierre was sitting in the drawing room where Shinshín had engaged him,
on him by the doctors, clergy, and relatives of the family. Prince
continued Prince Vasíli, returning to his theme, apparently not
“And then of course my family has also to be considered,” Prince
all his property, not to us his direct heirs, but to Pierre.”
majestic figure of his father, Count Bezúkhov, with that gray mane of
father and son. This lasted about two minutes, which to Pierre seemed an
side (only now did Pierre realize how near death his father was), and
family consultation; is it not so, Prince?”
the son, or Pierre, whom it had been pitiful to see, so stricken was he
arrival of young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, but
with his daughter, Princess Mary, and her companion, Mademoiselle
Vasíli’s son Anatole, whom they wish to reform by marrying him to
my respects to monsieur your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle
I cannot agree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as a child. He always
mine. I have written to my poor mother,” said the smiling Mademoiselle
porch. Prince Andrew got out of the carriage, helped his little wife to
Andrew apparently knew this as well as Tíkhon; he looked at his watch
of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stopped and
Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another, and
Odýntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitor for Mary,
my geometry lessons,” said Princess Mary gleefully, as if her lessons
thick, bushy eyebrows. Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on
house for your wife is ready. Princess Mary will take her there and
Prince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began—at first
dining room where his daughter-in-law, Princess Mary, and Mademoiselle
Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise. She did not understand
Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother’s
“Countess Apráksina, poor thing, has lost her husband and she has
of it. Prince Andrew” (he always spoke thus of his son) “has been
father-in-law and now at Princess Mary. When they left the table she
her sister-in-law’s room. Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without
Oh, Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have,” said she, sitting
Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile at those we
“To be quite frank, Mary, I expect Father’s character sometimes
very trying,” said Prince Andrew, apparently speaking lightly of their
Andrew... is Father’s way of treating religious subjects. I don’t
asleep. Prince Andrew felt sorry for his sister.
Andrew had already heard from his wife in the presence of others some
Andrew did not speak; he was both pleased and displeased that his father
right—serve him. Nicholas Bolkónski’s son need not serve under
Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a long time
a son of Nicholas Bolkónski, I shall be ashamed!”
“Adieu, Mary,” said he gently to his sister, taking her by the hand
her temples. Princess Mary, supporting her sister-in-law, still looked
From Vienna Kutúzov wrote to his old comrade, Prince Andrew’s father.
steps behind him holding two horses by their bridles. Each time Prince
their way to negotiate with Prince Auersperg. He lets them enter the
his suite, with their Cossacks who were talking loudly together, Prince
The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and rode on.
Prince Bagratión rode an officer of the suite, the prince’s personal
The silence lasted some time. Prince Bagratión, apparently not wishing
Prince Vasíli did everything to get Pierre to marry his daughter. Had
The beauty went to the aunt, but Anna Pávlovna detained Pierre, looking
father, Count Bezúkhov, and showed them her own box. Princess Hélène
in me. I have been told that her brother Anatole was in love with her
he was sent away. Hippolyte is her brother... Prince Vasíli is her
daughter of Prince Vasíli, but visualized her whole body only veiled
visit his neglected estates at the same time and pick up his son Anatole
his wife said—met for supper at Prince Vasíli’s. All these friends
and there too sat the members of the family, and Pierre and Hélène,
diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre’s happiness. The old
While the guests were taking their leave Pierre remained for a long time
parents who have petted their children from babyhood, but which Prince
wife, was talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre.
“Thank God!” said Prince Vasíli. “My wife has told me
He embraced his daughter, and then again Pierre, and kissed him with his
Six weeks later he was married, and settled in Count Bezúkhov’s
the same time, my honored benefactor,” wrote Prince Vasíli. “My son
Excellency Prince Vasíli Kurágin and his son, I understand?” she
“I say, Father, joking apart, is she very hideous?” Anatole asked,
When Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasíli and his son were already
Prince Vasíli and that son of his to me? Prince Vasíli is a shallow
certain. There’s Lise, married to Andrew—a better husband one would
unmarried, and even the happier for it?” So thought Prince Bolkónski
an immediate answer. Prince Vasíli had brought his son with the evident
Prince Bolkónski’s household felt that their life had not been real
reproached her for yielding to a man without being married. Mademoiselle
and he would marry her. So her future shaped itself in Mademoiselle
went to her father’s room at the usual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne
his daughter that morning. Princess Mary well knew this painstaking
not come and brought his pupil with him” (for some reason Prince
“How understand me!” cried her father angrily. “Prince Vasíli
wish or not to be Prince Anatole Kurágin’s wife? Reply: yes or no,”
glancing at Prince Vasíli and at her father with her beautiful eyes.
father and Andrew. I shall be so happy when she is his wife. She is so
promotion, Nicholas said that he kissed his father’s and mother’s
of the sayings and doings of their commander, the Grand Duke, and told
the Russian with his heir the Tsarévich, and the Austrian with the
and the two Emperors were living with their suites, households, and
occupied by the Emperors and their retinues.
retreating against their will. A few minutes after the Emperor had
love, though less ecstatically, with their Tsar and the glory of the
personal interview was refused, and instead of the Sovereign, Prince
line to reconnoiter personally, and twice to the Emperors, Russian and
“Count Ilyá Rostóv’s son?” asked Dolgorúkov.
passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at a bold, brisk
Prince Andrew shouted, “Brothers! All’s lost!” And at this as if
the front. I held my sword in my left hand, Count. All our family—the
the Emperor, and a thousand reasons occurred to him why it would be
attention. Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him on the battlefield
little gold icon Princess Mary had hung round her brother’s neck, but
seeing the favor the Emperor showed the prisoners, they now hastened to
“Dólokhov, Mary Ivánovna’s son,” she said in a mysterious
Just before dinner, Count Ilyá Rostóv presented his son to Bagratión,
Pierre had of late rarely seen his wife alone. Both in Petersburg and in
father’s room, that huge room in which Count Bezúkhov had died.
criminal,” came into Pierre’s head, “and from their point of
father’s nature showed itself in Pierre. He felt the fascination and
A week later Pierre gave his wife full power to control all his estates
“Father! Andrew!”—said the ungraceful, awkward princess with such
When Princess Mary returned from her father, the little princess sat
of the maids who was present. (Mary Bogdánovna was a midwife from the
her sufferings or with their relief. The pangs began again and Mary
Prince Andrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the room next
Two hours later Prince Andrew, stepping softly, went into his father’s
to the godmother, Princess Mary. Prince Andrew sat in another room,
happiest, merriest times for him and the whole family. Nicholas brought
pretty young Princesses Gorchakóv met suitors there and were married
and saying something in their gypsy accents. Nicholas understood that it
“Your cousin...” Dólokhov started to say, but Nicholas interrupted
After his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersburg. At the
whose words struck Pierre more and more by their precision and firmness.
The Mason looked intently at Pierre and smiled as a rich man with
Pierre listened with swelling heart, gazing into the Mason’s face with
Pierre wished to say this to the Mason, but did not dare to. The
“I?... I’m going to Petersburg,” answered Pierre, in a childlike,
brothers more worthy than he would test him and that Pierre had only to
if you have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood.” (Pierre nodded
Rhetor’s instructions. The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre’s
candlesticks like those used in churches. Two of the brothers led Pierre
of Alms” went round to all the brothers. Pierre would have liked
A week later, Pierre, having taken leave of his new friends, the Masons,
confirmed by Pierre’s rupture with his wife, was the talk of society.
father to fits of bloodthirsty rage. And when after Pierre’s
and that her husband was a cross laid upon her by God. Prince Vasíli
by her husband, Mortemart, the delightful Prince Hippolyte who had
minutest details himself. Princess Mary had ceased taking lessons in
grandfather called him). The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wet
Mary spent most of the day in the nursery, taking a mother’s place to
her little nephew as best she could. Mademoiselle Bourienne, too, seemed
though of this Prince Andrew said nothing to his sister, was that in the
Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father’s
table, a child’s table, and the little chair on which Prince Andrew
“My dear,” said Princess Mary, addressing her brother from beside
Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him. He was burning hot.
Prince Andrew, recalling his father’s letter. “Yes, we have gained
Prince Andrew looked at his sister. In the dim shadow of the curtain her
Soon after his admission to the Masonic Brotherhood, Pierre went to the
Pierre felt himself far poorer than when his father had made him
Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre realized that he did not
Andrew’s presence. He was ashamed to express his new Masonic views,
“When you see my sister, Princess Mary, you’ll get on with her,”
And he began to explain Freemasonry as he understood it to Prince
Andrew. He said that Freemasonry is the teaching of Christianity freed
“Let us go and see my sister,” he said to Pierre when he returned.
said to Pierre as he kissed her hand. She had known him as a child, and
now his friendship with Andrew, his misfortune with his wife, and above
and Princess Mary’s helpless attempts to protect them were their
brother,” she said. “How do you find Andrew?” she added hurriedly,
Before supper, Prince Andrew, coming back to his father’s study, found
went on, addressing his son and patting Pierre on the shoulder. “A
his grandfather called him) smiled at Pierre and let himself be taken
the enemy, had taken prisoners, and once had even captured Marshal
words spoken by important personages. At the moment the Emperors went
officers, Rostóv had argued that if Napoleon were taken prisoner he
gentlemen of the Emperor’s suite ran down the stairs and went to their
Alexander and Napoleon, with the long train of their suites, approached
Prince Andrew spent half his time at Bald Hills with his father and his
“Boguchárovo Cloister,” as his father called Prince Andrew’s
with the lofty heavens, his wife’s dead reproachful face, Pierre at
to the Emperor and that the latter disliked his face and personality
“No,” said Prince Andrew, “my father did not wish me to take
Andrew the feeling he had experienced toward him at their first meeting.
Freemasonry and not as Prince B. or Iván Vasílevich D., whom he knew
Solomon. Pierre respected this class of Brothers to which the elder ones
Pierre began to feel dissatisfied with what he was doing. Freemasonry,
In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to Petersburg. Our Freemasons knew
which Pierre promised to communicate to the Petersburg Brothers what
Following this letter one of the Masonic Brothers whom Pierre respected
At the same time his mother-in-law, Prince Vasíli’s wife, sent to
Without replying either to his wife or his mother-in-law, Pierre late
Pierre was just the husband needed for a brilliant society woman. He was
advantageous background to his elegant and tactful wife. Pierre during
Moscow, and the most diverse people met at their suppers. Country
Perónskaya a maid of honor, Pierre Bezúkhov, and the son of their
and paid the eldest daughter, Countess Véra, the attentions a young man
“Because, consider, Count—if I allowed myself to marry now
“That is Bezúkhova’s brother, Anatole Kurágin,” she said,
Freemason,” she went on, indicating Pierre. “Put him beside his wife
my wife,” said Prince Andrew to himself quite to his own surprise, as
to enliven him and amuse themselves. But their gaiety seemed to Prince
Just then Count Bezúkhov was announced. Husband and wife glanced at one
They received Pierre in their small, new drawing room, where it was
sister. With so intellectual a guest as she considered Prince Andrew to
“I know your sister too little,” replied Prince Andrew, with a
Count,” she said to Pierre, “even our dear cousin Borís, who,
“Oh, there was childish love?” suddenly asked Prince Andrew,
said her mother, thoughtfully, referring to some verses Prince Andrew
his wife with the royal prince, Pierre had unexpectedly been made a
Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and dumped his heavy person down on
disillusionment? Pierre was the only person to whom he made up his mind
Prince Andrew needed his father’s consent to his marriage, and to
“I have come, Countess, to ask for your daughter’s hand,” said
Prince Andrew began to explain to her the reasons for this delay.
their coming to Petersburg, and the likeness between Natásha and Prince
spoke of their future life. Prince Andrew was afraid and ashamed to
constantly divined. Once she began questioning him about his son. Prince
from childhood. He has a heart of gold. I beg you, Natalie,” Prince
Neither her father, nor her mother, nor Sónya, nor Prince Andrew
During that year after his son’s departure, Prince Nicholas
Princess Mary had two passions and consequently two joys—her nephew,
his father about something, and Princess Mary noticed that before his
as a mother. As it is, not only has she left us, and particularly Prince
Our family life goes on in the old way except for my brother Andrew’s
Andrew. I do not think he would choose her for a wife, and frankly I do
to his father. He had not done so for fear Princess Mary should ask her
eh? Yes, a nice stepmother little Nicholas will have! Write and tell him
that he may marry tomorrow if he likes. She will be little Nicholas’
Little Nicholas and his education, her brother Andrew, and religion
everyone must have personal hopes, Princess Mary in the profoundest
Reading these letters, Nicholas felt a dread of their wanting to
about Sónya and about the confusion of their affairs, and Nicholas
one in honor of their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska) would take place
“You see he writes,” said she, showing her son a letter of Prince
Andrew’s, with that latent grudge a mother always has in regard to a
“Good morning, Uncle!” said Nicholas, when the old man drew near.
The hounds were joined into one pack, and “Uncle” and Nicholas rode
thought Nicholas, and looked sternly at his sister, trying to make her
to be late, and the huntsmen had not yet reached their places when Count
Nicholas and his attendant, with “Uncle” and his huntsman, were all
Nicholas, not stopping to talk to the man, asked his sister and Pétya
When, much later, “Uncle” rode up to Nicholas and began talking
a trap, while Nicholas rode with Natásha and Pétya to “Uncle’s”
Nicholas, and Pétya took off their wraps and sat down on the sofa.
Nicholas!” she said, turning to her brother, as if asking him: “What
Nicholas too was greatly pleased by “Uncle’s” playing, and
traps. Natásha and Nicholas got into the other. “Uncle” wrapped
did not improve. Natásha and Nicholas often noticed their parents
solution, namely, for Nicholas to marry a rich heiress. She felt this to
be their last hope and that if Nicholas refused the match she had found
everything depend on her daughter’s inclination. She invited Nicholas
“You go ahead, Zakhár!” shouted Nicholas to his father’s
Soon after the Christmas holidays Nicholas told his mother of his love
give their blessing to such a marriage. Nicholas, for the first time,
been in disorder, no better wife for Nicholas than Sónya could have
replied that he was of age, that Prince Andrew was marrying without his
that Nicholas received a promise from his mother that Sónya should not
to retire from the army and return and marry Sónya, Nicholas, serious,
Moscow society, from the old women down to the children, received Pierre
At the beginning of winter Prince Nicholas Bolkónski and his daughter
her, and for various reasons Princess Mary avoided her. Julie, with whom
little Nicholas some symptoms of her father’s irritability. However
jest—that if Andrew got married he himself would marry Bourienne—had
One day in Moscow in Princess Mary’s presence (she thought her father
nephew, General Chatróv an old war comrade of the prince’s, and
her, feeling that she was in no mood for their conversation. Count
All were silent. On this fact relating to the Emperor personally, it was
“Oh, my God, Count, there are moments when I would marry anybody!”
the two richest heiresses, Julie and Princess Mary. Though Princess
reliable source that Prince Vasíli has sent his son to Moscow to get
future daughter-in-law to old Prince Bolkónski while he was in Moscow
shrine of the Mother of God and to Madame Suppert-Roguet, who was so
Now listen! You know that old Prince Nicholas much dislikes his son’s
marrying. The old fellow’s crotchety! Of course Prince Andrew is not
was Mademoiselle Bourienne. She greeted the father and daughter
She was the Countess Bezúkhova, Pierre’s wife, and the count, who
betrothed, of Princess Mary, or of life in the country did not once
Anatole Kurágin was staying in Moscow because his father had sent him
forced him to marry his daughter. Anatole had very soon abandoned his
“I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner,” said Anatole.
“So she knows I am engaged, and she and her husband Pierre—that good
of men and women known for the freedom of their conduct. Mademoiselle
beauty and her dress. Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle George went
arranging the chairs and taking their seats. Anatole moved a chair for
what was good or bad, reasonable or senseless. Behind her sat Anatole,
Mademoiselle George, expressing their enthusiasm.
son happy.” Princess Mary went on to ask Natásha to fix a time when
vividly pictured herself as Prince Andrew’s wife, and the scenes of
your father and of Nicholas.”
From the day his wife arrived in Moscow Pierre had been intending to go
importance relating to Andrew Bolkónski and his betrothed. Pierre had
without her parents’ knowledge and that the cause of this was Anatole
Kurágin into whose society Pierre’s wife had thrown her and with whom
secretly married (as Pierre knew), and should be so in love with him as
“But how get married?” said Pierre, in answer to Márya Dmítrievna. “He
and she therefore asked Pierre to tell his brother-in-law in her name to
ill, and God knows what! It’s hard, Count, hard to manage daughters in
When Márya Dmítrievna told Natásha that Anatole was married, Natásha
Pierre without greeting his wife whom he had not seen since his
“Ah, Pierre,” said the countess going up to her husband. “You don’t know
“Where you are, there is vice and evil!” said Pierre to his wife.
Anatole glanced round at his sister and rose submissively, ready to
Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his face betrayed
“You promised Countess Rostóva to marry her and were about to elope with
“Mon cher,” answered Anatole (their whole conversation was in French),
Pierre knew so well in his wife, revolted him.
been told that Anatole was married, with some arsenic she had stealthily
father Natásha’s note to Princess Mary breaking off her engagement
his father and Prince Meshchérski, warmly disputing and vigorously
“If there were treason, or proofs of secret relations with Napoleon,
“He could not marry, for he was married already,” said Pierre.
Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably, again reminding one of his father.
always, but beneath her sympathy for her brother, Pierre noticed her
evident. Prince Andrew talked incessantly, arguing now with his father,
The Emperor, with the agitation of one who has been personally
which Count Lauriston informs me, as a reason for this aggression, that
from the time Prince Kurákin asked for his passports. The reasons on
take it and hand it personally to the French Emperor. When dispatching
repeat them personally to Napoleon.
interview with Napoleon in Danzig, when his august brother-in-law had
the Emperor Alexander has surrounded himself with my personal enemies.
city. Pierre had warned his brother-in-law that Prince Andrew was on
Prince Andrew found life easier to bear. After his betrothed had broken
“Father, I did not want to judge,” said Prince Andrew, in a hard and
before leaving, Prince Andrew went to his son’s rooms. The boy,
“So you’ve decided to go, Andrew?” asked his sister.
unhappy her father would be if Andrew left without being reconciled to
esteem personally. Armfeldt virulently hated Napoleon and was a general
and the defect of frankness in their opinions. They feared Napoleon,
Emperor, would stubbornly insist on the correctness or falsity of some
Russia’s triumph in so far as it was produced by the Tsar’s personal
personally, to question him about Turkey, and that Prince Andrew was to
personally. To this semicouncil had been invited the Swedish General
Mary Hendríkhovna was the wife of the regimental doctor, a pretty young
account yield their position. Mary Hendríkhovna obliged them with the
to see them was glad to see only one person, Pierre. It would have been
a crying child. It was not because Pierre was a married man, but because
Among these letters was one from Nicholas Rostóv to his father. Pierre
Pierre could not refrain from making them happy by the news of their
“And have you heard?” Shinshín asked. “Prince Golítsyn has engaged a
All these nobles, whom Pierre met every day at the Club or in their own
everyone of us will go, for our father the Tsar!” he shouted, rolling
Pierre had seen in their own homes with their buffoons, or playing
The day after his son had left, Prince Nicholas sent for Princess Mary
After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week. He was
The chief reason Princess Mary did not realize the full significance of
Princess Mary looked inquiringly at her father. He was examining the
the fruit. An old peasant whom Prince Andrew in his childhood had often
Prince Andrew shared their wish for the success of their enterprise. He
Kutúzov: ‘Your Emperor and the Fatherland award you this honor.’”
thence to Moscow. Princess Mary, alarmed by her father’s feverish and
Princess Mary entered her father’s room and went up to his bed. He was
eyes. “Call Andrew!” he said suddenly, and a childish, timid expression
or Prince Andrew, of herself, of his grandson, or of his own death, and
After her father’s funeral Princess Mary shut herself up in her room and
I, the daughter of Prince Nicholas Bolkónski, asked General Rameau for
father and of Prince Andrew. Involuntarily she thought their thoughts
thrust into his bosom. “My mistress, daughter of General in Chief Prince
moment?” thought Princess Mary. “And that caused his sister to refuse my
brother?” And in all this Princess Mary saw the hand of Providence.
personally Nicholas could not wish for a better wife: by marrying her
father’s affairs in order, and would even—he felt it—ensure Princess
Kutúzov’s adjutant whispered to Prince Andrew that this was the wife of
Prince Andrew told Kutúzov all he knew of his father’s death, and what
personal wish directed to something else. And above all,” thought Prince
his absent-mindedness and good nature, Pierre’s personality immediately
“They are waiting for their younger son,” Pierre replied. “He joined
“On the contrary, things seem satisfactory, ma cousine,” said Pierre
all of them stared with naïve, childlike curiosity at Pierre’s white hat
suite, with Pierre among them, set out on their ride along the line.
The officers were about to take leave, but Prince Andrew, apparently
Prince Andrew now seemed excited. He could apparently not refrain from
“Not take prisoners,” Prince Andrew continued: “That by itself would
to Napoleon by the daughter of the Emperor of Austria, the boy whom for
apparently seemed to Napoleon, as it had done to all who had seen it in
son’s portrait grew still louder. Napoleon frowned.
not because of Napoleon’s orders but by their own volition. The whole
was not because of Napoleon’s commands that they killed their fellow
The soldiers shook their heads disapprovingly as they looked at Pierre.
regiment. The men soon accepted Pierre into their family, adopted him,
inclined to think he had been taken prisoner because Pierre’s strong
and reported to Napoleon that their attack had been repulsed, Campan
their orders, like Napoleon’s, were seldom carried out, and then but
His very first, remotest recollections of childhood came back to Prince
the passage. Only Malásha, Andrew’s six-year-old granddaughter whom
Count Rostopchín, who now taunted those who left Moscow and now had the
she mentioned Napoleon and some other exalted personages), that she had
and to those of Monsieur de Jobert and their voices trembled. A dance,
marriage was Hélène’s mother, Princess Kurágina. She was continually
way Pierre was told of the death of his brother-in-law Anatole and of
men, one of whom he knew. After greeting Pierre they continued their
“Yes, I am a Mason,” Pierre replied.
A dozen persons who had business with Pierre were awaiting him in the
family, Count Ilyá Rostóv, continually drove about the city collecting
countess, “but I always wanted Nicholas to marry the princess, and had a
the Rostóvs’ affairs was by Nicholas marrying a rich woman, and that the
Madame Schoss, who had been out to visit her daughter, increased the
who had brought a letter from his wife, the Countess Hélène, he felt
Bazdéev’s widow had called to ask Pierre to take charge of her husband’s
mother city, must feel her feminine character, and Napoleon felt it.
In reply to an inquiry about the convicts in the prison, Count
“Is that their Tsar himself? He’s not bad!” low voices could be heard
that low and simple kind that Pierre had once felt for his wife, nor
astonishment in their eyes chiefly because Pierre, unlike all the
“Don’t, Mary Nikoláevna!” said her husband to her in a low voice,
“There’s a child in that house. Haven’t you seen a child?” cried Pierre.
restore the daughter to her mother and go to save someone else. Pierre
Pierre replied that the child belonged to a woman in a black coat who
“Here, take the child!” said Pierre peremptorily and hurriedly to the
“I will not tell you who I am. I am your prisoner—take me!” Pierre
“You are Count Ilyá Rostóv’s son? My wife was a great friend of your
and well-bred Count Rostóv. Among the men was an Italian prisoner, an
their well-fitting Hessian boots, Nicholas told the blonde lady that he
important person. “Come, Nicholas! You know you let me call you so?”
“Her niece, Princess Bolkónskaya. She is here in Vorónezh with her aunt.
important personages of the town. This was Malvíntseva, Princess Mary’s
After a few words about Princess Mary and her late father, whom
“Whom do you mean, Aunt?” asked Nicholas.
“What a matchmaker you are, Aunt...” said Nicholas, kissing her plump
found her nephew there with his tutor, and a letter from Prince Andrew
governor’s wife began to speak of Rostóv in Mary’s presence, praising
about it; they spoke of their last meeting—Nicholas trying to change the
subject—they talked of the governor’s kind wife, of Nicholas’ relations,
as her aunt mentioned Andrew. Evidently she could speak of Russia’s
there are children, turned to Prince Andrew’s little son, caressing him
is that if your brother, Prince Andrew Nikoláevich, were not living, it
Nicholas took the two letters, one of which was from his mother and
the countess’ repeatedly expressed wish that Nicholas should marry
Next day Nicholas took his mother’s letter and went to see Princess
then not be able to marry Princess Mary as they would be within the
niece passed, “Sónya, won’t you write to Nicholas?” She spoke in a soft,
Prince Andrew would prevent Nicholas from marrying Princess Mary, she
From Prince Shcherbátov’s house the prisoners were led straight down the
prisoner, the one next to Pierre, was led away—alone. Pierre did not
After the execution Pierre was separated from the rest of the prisoners
the prisoners of war. Without understanding what was said to him, Pierre
questions. He seemed grieved that Pierre had no parents, especially that
When Princess Mary heard from Nicholas that her brother was with the
Nicholas, when he had come to tell her that her brother was with the
Mary that he was even glad that the family connection between them
brother? Mademoiselle Bourienne put that question for her.
“One moment, Princess, one moment, my dear! Is this his son?” said the
person. While talking to Princess Mary he continually looked round as
imagination Andrew’s face as she remembered it in childhood, a gentle,
Prince Andrew did not notice that she called his sister Mary, and only
the thought that little Nicholas would be left without a father. With
Prince Andrew’s little son was seven. He could scarcely read, and knew
his father, Mary, and Natásha, than he had then. He understood it
Natásha and Princess Mary also wept now, but not because of their own
note from Bennigsen who sent personal reports to the Emperor, the wishes
Napoleon also did all in his power. He caused the words Maison de ma
stolen. Napoleon, too, carried away his own personal trésor, but on
“What sunshine, Monsieur Kiril!” (Their name for Pierre.) “Eh? Just like
prisoners and the French soldiers, in which Pierre had succeeded in
pacifying his comrades.) Some of the prisoners who had heard Pierre
Four weeks had passed since Pierre had been taken prisoner and though
their prisoner’s name was Count Bezúkhov?

=== CHARACTER CONTEXT ===

“It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor
Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew
Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from
the moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,
Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was
“No, impossible!” said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing
“Very lovely,” said Prince Andrew.
In passing Prince Vasíli seized Pierre’s hand and said to Anna
Prince Andrew looked Anna Pávlovna straight in the face with a
“That is doubtful,” said Prince Andrew. “Monsieur le Vicomte quite
“Bonaparte has said so,” remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic
it,’” Prince Andrew continued after a short silence, again quoting
“The execution of the Duc d’Enghien,” declared Monsieur Pierre,
“What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination shows
man. The Revolution was a grand thing!” continued Monsieur Pierre,
Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the
“But, my dear Monsieur Pierre,” said she, “how do you explain the
“One must admit,” continued Prince Andrew, “that Napoleon as a man
Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of
hope you will change your opinions, my dear Monsieur Pierre.”
Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders
“Allow me, sir,” said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold,
Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew’s study like
said Prince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white
face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstract
diplomatist?” asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.
on anything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking.
“That is all nonsense.” Prince Andrew again interrupted him, “let
answer than the one Prince Andrew gave to this naïve question.
Prince Andrew smiled ironically.
dress as fresh and elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rose and politely
are, Monsieur Pierre!”
“Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier,” said Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked about the room.
“Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?” exclaimed the little
“Lise!” was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed
“Lise, I beg you to desist,” said Prince Andrew still more
Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.
“Lise!” said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch
continually glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead
Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and,
As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkónski
friend a model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the
Prince Andrew’s calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary
“My part is played out,” said Prince Andrew. “What’s the use of
Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance—friendly and
“I don’t understand it,” replied Prince Andrew. “Women who are
Pierre was staying at Prince Vasíli Kurágin’s and sharing the
But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go
promise to Prince Andrew was of no account, because before he gave it
he had already promised Prince Anatole to come to his gathering;
“Ah, Count Rostóv!” exclaimed Pierre joyfully. “Then you are his
Nicholas. I never knew any Madame Jacquot.”
letter to the Emperor begging him to recognize Pierre as legitimate, it
follows that Pierre will not be Pierre but will become Count Bezúkhov,
Prince Vasíli’s face so out of keeping with his dignity that Pierre
continued. During this interval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasíli
Prince Vasíli came next. He staggered to the sofa on which Pierre was
silence at Princess Anna Mikháylovna. After her talk with Pierre, Anna
At Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andréevich Bolkónski’s estate, the
prince’s household. General in Chief Prince Nicholas Andréevich
just as the architect, gardener, or Princess Mary did, till the prince
Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad, scared expression that
Having read thus far, Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror
generally the stronger! I know very well that Count Nicholas is too
to know as plain Monsieur Pierre, has become Count Bezúkhov and the
terribly true. I pity Prince Vasíli but am still more sorry for Pierre.
She brought into Princess Mary’s strenuous, mournful, and gloomy
“Ah, dear friend,” replied Princess Mary, “I have asked you never
Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression.
middle, a cry was heard, then Princess Mary’s heavy tread and the
sound of kissing. When Prince Andrew went in the two princesses, who
cry or to laugh. Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned, as
kissing each other on the face, and then to Prince Andrew’s surprise
cry. Prince Andrew evidently felt ill at ease, but to the two women
“And I had no idea!...” exclaimed Princess Mary. “Ah, Andrew, I
he told her she was still the same crybaby as ever. Princess Mary had
rested on Prince Andrew’s face.
a real one, but that they would talk of that later. Princess Mary was
Princess Mary did not listen to the end, but continuing her train of
“She needs rest,” said Prince Andrew with a frown. “Don’t you,
lathe?” asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile which
style, wearing an antique coat and powdered hair; and when Prince Andrew
pregnant,” said Prince Andrew, following every movement of his
Prince Andrew smiled.
The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing his
by which the prince was to enter. Prince Andrew was looking at a large
ancestor of the Bolkónskis. Prince Andrew, looking again at that
“How thoroughly like him that is!” he said to Princess Mary, who had
“Everyone has his Achilles’ heel,” continued Prince Andrew.
pretending to do something real. Prince Andrew gaily bore with his
Consider, Prince Andrew. Two... Frederick and Suvórov; Moreau!...
“Oh, he is so kind!” answered Princess Mary.
Prince Andrew was to leave next evening. The old prince, not altering
traveling effects of Prince Andrew’s were in very good order: new,
one reviews the past and plans for the future. Prince Andrew’s face
expression. It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard.
Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironical and
makes things trying for you, doesn’t it?” Prince Andrew asked
Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question.
powder,” said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly.
“Even if it were a great deal of trouble...” answered Prince Andrew,
To please you...” said Prince Andrew. But immediately, noticing
Red patches appeared on Princess Mary’s face and she was silent as if
Princess Mary rose and moved to the door, then stopped and said:
“Well, maybe!” said Prince Andrew. “Go, Másha; I’ll come
wing with the other, Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bourienne smiling
Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of anger suddenly
Mary, and the little princess. Prince Andrew had been called to his
When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old-age
Prince Andrew, evidently confused. “I know that out of a million
“I don’t understand!” said Prince Andrew.
him. “Remember this, Prince Andrew, if they kill you it will hurt me,
“I also wanted to ask you,” continued Prince Andrew, “if I’m
at the door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a white
Prince Andrew sighed and made no reply.
angrily blowing his nose. Hardly had Prince Andrew gone when the study
to recollect something. Prince Andrew stepped forward from among the
“This is Dólokhov,” said Prince Andrew.
the advanced army. Prince Andrew Bolkónski came into the room with the
“Give me that letter,” said Kutúzov turning to Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood from the
Though not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia, he
generally, Prince Andrew had, as he had had in Petersburg society, two
Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so that they respected and even
his hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade, the aide-de-camp on duty,
Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders.
“Probably,” said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door.
Prince Andrew stopped short.
Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest
Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went toward his
“Why are you so glum?” asked Nesvítski noticing Prince Andrew’s
Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvítski and Zherkóv, there came toward
Nesvítski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, but
“What’s the matter?” exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in
Prince Andrew during the battle had been in attendance on the Austrian
build Prince Andrew could endure physical fatigue far better than many
Prince Andrew told his driver to stop, and asked a soldier in what
answered the soldier. Prince Andrew took out his purse and gave the
It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew rattled over the paved
Prince Andrew when he drove up to the palace felt even more vigorous and
The adjutant on duty, meeting Prince Andrew, asked him to wait, and went
with particular courtesy ushered Prince Andrew before him along a
Prince Andrew’s joyous feeling was considerably weakened as he
Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kutúzov’s army
head, but the instant he turned to Prince Andrew the firm, intelligent
at Prince Andrew, evidently considering something.
When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest
Prince Andrew stayed at Brünn with Bilíbin, a Russian acquaintance of
said Bilíbin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew. “Franz, put the
After washing and dressing, Prince Andrew came into the diplomat’s
Prince Andrew. They had known each other previously in Petersburg, but
had become more intimate when Prince Andrew was in Vienna with Kutúzov.
Just as Prince Andrew was a young man who gave promise of rising high
“But seriously,” said Prince Andrew, “we can at any rate say
methods that he had better leave Genoa alone?” retorted Prince Andrew
He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkled his
Prince Andrew, beginning to understand that his news of the battle
Prince Andrew.
“What an extraordinary genius!” Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed,
“But joking apart,” said Prince Andrew, “do you really think the
“Impossible!” cried Prince Andrew. “That would be too base.”
When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in a
face, and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom—he had to
to him about politics. Prince Andrew and the others gathered round these
“Wait, I have not finished...” he said to Prince Andrew, seizing
gentlemen, it is already time for me to go,” replied Prince Andrew
At the levee Prince Andrew stood among the Austrian officers as he had
conversation began Prince Andrew was struck by the fact that the Emperor
Prince Andrew replied. Then followed other questions just as simple:
The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed. Prince Andrew withdrew and
Before returning to Bilíbin’s Prince Andrew had gone to a bookshop
“Eh? What?” asked Prince Andrew.
Prince Andrew could not understand.
“I did not... What is it all about?” inquired Prince Andrew
Emperor Napoleon if we take this bridge, so let us three go and take
“Stop jesting,” said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously. This news
Emperor Napoleon burns with impatience to make Prince Auersperg’s
“It may be treachery,” said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining the
“Where are you off to?” he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who had
And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his departure went to
Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply.
“Not at all,” said Prince Andrew.
“I cannot argue about it,” replied Prince Andrew coldly, but he
with carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage. Prince Andrew
apron under the leather hood of the vehicle. Prince Andrew rode up
piercingly. Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind the apron
Prince Andrew riding up to the officer.
“Let them pass, I tell you!” repeated Prince Andrew, compressing his
Prince Andrew saw that the officer was in that state of senseless,
Prince Andrew, his face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raised
Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from the
Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvítski and another adjutant
added, noticing that Prince Andrew winced as at an electric shock.
“It’s nothing,” replied Prince Andrew.
abominable, quite abominable!” said Prince Andrew, and he went off to
at Prince Andrew and did not even nod to him.
horses near the window, Prince Andrew felt that something important and
Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard.
Prince Andrew stood right in front of Kutúzov but the expression of
“I have the honor to present myself,” repeated Prince Andrew rather
Prince Andrew glanced at Kutúzov’s face only a foot distant from him
on the soft springs of the carriage, he turned to Prince Andrew.
questioned Prince Andrew about the details of his interview with the
Between three and four o’clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, who
as if to reassure Prince Andrew.
brave officer,” thought Bagratión. Prince Andrew, without replying,
French though he spoke it badly, offered to conduct Prince Andrew.
said Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything.
Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artillery officer
from Prince Andrew to the staff officer.
Prince Andrew glanced again at the artillery officer’s small figure.
bank by unseen hands. Prince Andrew and the officer rode up, looked at
seen. Prince Andrew stopped and began examining the position.
“Thank you very much, I will go on alone,” said Prince Andrew,
The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone.
could be felt, but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French lines the
commander, higher than and different from the others, Prince Andrew came
Prince Andrew, having reached the front line, rode along it. Our front
grew weary waiting to be relieved. Prince Andrew halted to have a look
The soldier to whom the laughers referred was Dólokhov. Prince Andrew
Prince Andrew was surveying the position, was the easiest and most
difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire. Prince Andrew took
dip. Prince Andrew, being always near the commander in chief, closely
“No, friend,” said a pleasant and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, a
“Why,” thought Prince Andrew, “that’s the captain who stood up
Mounting his horse again Prince Andrew lingered with the battery,
The battle had begun! Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped back
“It has begun. Here it is!” thought Prince Andrew, feeling the
white horse, was Prince Bagratión. Prince Andrew stopped, waiting for
Prince Andrew nodded to him. He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew
Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face
impassive face?” Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked. Prince
Bagratión bent his head in sign of agreement with what Prince Andrew
had foreseen. Prince Andrew, out of breath with his rapid ride, spoke
of Túshin’s battery. Prince Andrew followed with the suite. Behind
a kind no longer in general use. Prince Andrew remembered the story of
at which Prince Andrew had been when he examined the battlefield.
dull eyes looked at him in silence. It seemed to Prince Andrew that the
support of his battery all was forgotten. Prince Andrew listened
in accord with his intentions. Prince Andrew noticed, however, that
often heard. “What is this?” thought Prince Andrew approaching the
Sixth Chasseurs whom they had just passed. Prince Andrew was struck by
a cavalryman. Prince Andrew felt that an invisible power was leading him
The French were already near. Prince Andrew, walking beside Bagratión,
send his orderly staff officer, and later Prince Andrew also, to order
It was Prince Andrew. The first thing he saw on riding up to the space
artilleryman to Prince Andrew. “Not like your honor!”
Prince Andrew said nothing to Túshin. They were both so busy as to seem
(one shattered gun and one unicorn were left behind), Prince Andrew rode
ring, and Zherkóv, uneasily glancing at them all, and Prince Andrew,
“I had not the pleasure of seeing you,” said Prince Andrew, coldly
intervene. Prince Andrew looked at Túshin from under his brows and his
“Your excellency!” Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abrupt
and without awaiting a reply, Prince Andrew rose and left the table.
Prince Andrew gave him a look, but said nothing and went away. He felt
Pierre, on unexpectedly becoming Count Bezúkhov and a rich man, felt
More than anyone else, Prince Vasíli took possession of Pierre’s
Moscow after the death of Count Bezúkhov, he would call Pierre, or
ranks; Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces; Prince Andrew
where his regiment was stationed, and take him to visit Prince Nicholas
Prince Vasíli had to settle matters with Pierre, who, it is true, had
directed to—Pierre and Hélène. Prince Vasíli mimicked the sobbing
in her eyes, which, for an instant, glanced at Pierre, Prince Vasíli
Prince Vasíli smiled, and Pierre noticed that everyone was smiling at
the large drawing room. Prince Vasíli came up to Pierre with languid
footsteps. Pierre rose and said it was getting late. Prince Vasíli gave
Prince Vasíli saw that Pierre knew this. He suddenly muttered
Old Prince Nicholas Bolkónski received a letter from Prince Vasíli
Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothing.
Before dinner, Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knew
same as usual,” and Princess Mary pale, frightened, and with downcast
don’t understand. Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know.
Prince Vasíli and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.
“If he starts a row I’ll go away,” said Prince Anatole. “I
been minutely described. Princess Mary was sitting alone in her room,
began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Mary should be
dressed. Princess Mary’s self-esteem was wounded by the fact that
sideways at Princess Mary from a little distance. “You have a maroon
It was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess Mary
which Princess Mary meekly submitted, just as her hair had been arranged
But when Katie brought the required dress, Princess Mary remained
“No, leave me alone,” said Princess Mary.
Mademoiselle Bourienne, “Mary’s is a face which such a coiffure does
that Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain, worse than usual,
“You will change it, won’t you?” said Lise. And as Princess Mary
Princess Mary was left alone. She did not comply with Lise’s request,
man, be for her? In her thoughts of marriage Princess Mary dreamed of
Princess Mary sighed, and having crossed herself went down, thinking
indicating her to the gentlemen, said: “Voilà Marie!” Princess Mary
and even Princess Mary felt herself pleasantly made to share in these
Princess Mary.
Princess Mary, little as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable to
dress, Mademoiselle Bourienne’s ribbon, Princess Mary’s unbecoming
coiffure, Mademoiselle Bourienne’s and Anatole’s smiles, and the
Prince Bolkónski surveyed Anatole.
ha!” laughed Prince Bolkónski, and Anatole laughed still louder.
Princess Mary grew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure. The
And Princess Mary tried, but could not manage, to be cordial to her new
Extracted 605 relationship sentences, 1499 character sentences
